Solution

DAILY TEST (AUGUST, WEEK 02)

Class 10 - Social Science
1. Sri Lanka became independent in 1948. It immediately adopted measures to impose Sinhala supremacy.
i. The Tamils felt alienated. No respect or recognition was given to their language, culture and religion.
ii. They began a struggle for equality in jobs, entry to the university, recognition of their language and culture.
iii. Slowly the conflict changed into a demand for regional autonomy.
iv. The Tamilians were grouped together in the North and East of Sri Lanka.
v. Their demands were ignored, the conflict became more severe and by the 1980s, the Tamilian demands had changed.
vi. They wanted Tamil Eelam in the North and East. A civil war ensued, which killed thousands on both sides.
vii. The flourishing economy of Sri Lanka has disappeared and the conflict has given a blow to social, cultural and economic life of Sri Lanka.
viii. A new constitution stipulated that the state shall protect and foster Buddhism.
ix. All these government measures, coming one after the other, gradually increased the feeling of alienation among the Sri Lankan Tamils.
x. In 1956 an act was passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official language, thus disregarding Tamil.
2. Different people have different development goods:
i. Few want income.
ii. Few want development projects.
iii. Few want security and dignity.
iv. Few want equality.
v. Few want employment security.

Examples of Different Developmental Goals: - Urban vs. Rural Goals:
1. A girl from a rich urban family may aim for a high-paying job, quality education, and a luxurious lifestyle.
2. In contrast, a farmer in a rural area may prioritize agricultural productivity, access to water, and land ownership. - Gender-Specific Goals:
1. Women may seek a safe and secure environment to pursue various jobs or run businesses.
2. Gender equality and empowerment become essential developmental goals.
3. The following are the advantages for the workers in the organized sector:
i. Workers in the organized sector enjoy security of employment.
ii. Organized sector is registered by the government and has to follow its rules and regulations which are given in various laws such as the Factories Act, the Minimum Wages Act, the Payment of Gratuity Act, Shops Act, etc.
iii. They work only a fixed number of hours. If they are asked to work for longer hours, they are paid extra money for overtime by the employer.
iv. They also get several other benefits from the employers like paid leave, payment during holidays, provident fund and gratuity.
v. They also get medical benefits and, under the laws, the employer has to ensure facilities like drinking water and a safe working environment.
vi. When they retire, these workers get pensions as well.
4. Importance of Tertiary sector:
i. Several services such as hospitals, educational institutions, post telegraph services, police stations, courts, village administrative offices, municipal corporations, defence, transport, banks, insurance companies, etc. comes under tertiary sector. These activities are called as basic services.
ii. The development of agriculture and industry leads to the development of services such as transport, trade, storage, etc.
iii. Greater the development of the primary and secondary sectors more would be the demand for such services.
iv. As income levels rise, certain sections of people start demanding many more services like eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals, private schools, professional training etc.
v. Certain new services such as those based on information and communication technology have become important and essential. The production of these services has been rising rapidly.